My name is Michael Chow.
I'm a software engineer at PositPBC,
and I'm really excited to talk to you today
about how documentation is cursed.
And what I mean by that is I'm really interested
in documentation for open source tools.
And during this talk, I want you to think about
some of the documentation you've looked at
for different tools you've been interested in.
Have you ever looked at a documentation site for a tool
and felt like it's loaded up with information,
but it's not really the information you need?
I'd say that documentation site is cursed.
And I'm really excited, I think,
to really dive into what that means.
I think we have to go back 2,500 years
to the Greek myth of Tantalus,
who was cursed to be put under a tree
where branches of fruit hung right above his head,
and there was water at his feet.
But when he reached up to grab the fruit,
it was blown beyond his grasp.
And when he went to drink the water,
it receded so he couldn't reach it.
So what he needed was forever at arm's length.
And I think that cursed documentation
is worse than regular documentation
because it tantalizes users
with the promise of the answers you need.
But ultimately, we often can't get the understanding
that we need to do the problems to solve our problems.
So you might see docs, but it might be really hard
to figure out how everything fits together.
And what I'll talk about today
is I think that in 99% of the cases,
the solution is a really good user guide.
So I wanna go into what a user guide is and does,
and then five steps for creating a user guide.
All right, so to do that,
I'm gonna use great tables as an example.
And I'm glad Rich talked,
so he showed off great tables a little bit.
Great tables, it's really hard, I think,
to solve this problem and to do a good user guide.
And so I just wanna flag what this looks like
in great tables.
So great tables has two really recognizable pieces.
It has this examples gallery,
which is actually our most popular page on the site.
And then it has this API reference,
which is all the little pieces laid out.
And then we, but I would say we probably spent
the most time teasing out this piece, the user guide.
So to show what a user guide is and does,
let's go through the examples in reference
as if those were the only documentation we had.
So let's say you're looking at great tables
for the first time, and you pop open the examples page.
This is the most popular page
because it shows you at a glance real life use cases.
It really highlights why you would use great tables
and realistic things you could do with it.
So you might pick out this table
as a really interesting table.
This is our coffee table,
which represents the sales
of a fictitious coffee equipment supplier.
And so this shows off a lot of nice things
about great tables.
It shows off some different elements,
like making a title and filling backgrounds
and styling things like bolding stuff.
So let's say you wanna take this and adapt it,
and maybe you look at the code a little bit.
And to dig deeper, let's say you open the API reference.
So you go there, you hit this page,
and basically what the API reference is,
is it's a big list of functions categorized a little bit,
and it has a lot of pages that just go into detail
on all these tiny pieces.
But what I'm showing here is not the full story.
As it turns out, API references are pretty big.
So even this isn't quite it.
It's actually something more like this.
So you've got this neat example,
and you've got 105 functions,
and I think at this point you're a little bit cursed.
You have a really nice example in your hand.
You have 105 tiny things,
but I would say what you're missing
is these sort of like middle-sized chunks,
the strategies to be able to break down examples
into the tiny pieces,
and know how to remix things for your problems.
And that's exactly what a user guide does.
So I think that takes us to user guides.
How can we break this curse?
If I have one really neat example in my hand,
and the absolute deluge of 105 little tiny functions,
how can I find what I need?
So I think the key is that a user guide
can really help you understand the big structure
of examples and the big pieces for your problems.
So for example, if we're onboarding you to this example,
we might flag that there's a key piece
which is structure in GreatTables.
So that's something like this title
and these column spanners, these high-level labels,
or the fact that you can kind of clean up column names.
These are all structure activities in GreatTables.
We might also point out there's formatting.
So you can take these values
and you can turn them into currencies,
or you can turn them into things like percentages.
We also might point out
that there's another activity called styling.
You can color the background of a column,
or you can bold a row of text.
So the point here is that we've flagged
kind of three big activities you can use
as sort of an in-between between the tiny chunks
and the examples to help you understand
the overall structure of GreatTables.
And I'll call these components strategic components.
These are these kind of like middle chunks.
And I want to flag that this example,
I'll say this is a really good use of induction.
We're using a case study or a concrete example
to teach you about general ideas.
The other thing I want to point out
that's a challenge for user guides is task sequencing.
So this is the table that we might onboard someone with,
but I would say it's super hard to find,
even figure out like which example do we start with,
or how do we kind of weave through an example
to break it down for people.
But I would say this is the crux of a user guide,
is trying to get like a really good onboarding
so someone has an end-to-end example,
and then being able to sort of,
instead of flag 105 functions,
have say like 10 to 15 big concepts
that you want people to know,
so that they have this kind of digestible way
to break stuff down.
All right.
So that's the crux of what a user guide is and does.
It's those intermediate pieces
and the need to get a really nice onboarding.
I think what I want to spend the rest of my time on
is five steps I think are important to breaking the curse,
or how I would approach designing a user guide.
So I find user guides really tricky.
So working with Rich on Great Tables and Point Blank,
one interesting thing was,
Rich had worked a lot with these libraries,
and I came in not really know,
I had no idea what they did.
And so what we had to do is,
Rich just had to hit me with example after example,
to kind of like beat me over the head with examples
until some idea of the pieces came out.
And so I'll say this five step process
sort of emerged from me trying to figure out
how do we pull a user guide out of these libraries
I had never used before.
So I'll say the first step is collecting examples,
followed by scoping concepts,
so breaking the examples apart,
and then sequencing and onboarding,
figuring out how you would get a new person
to understand the crux of what your library does.
And then finally, detailing all the remaining concepts
or the big pieces left over,
and then drafting a workshop,
which I think is kind of like
the documentation form of touching grass,
being sure that your documentation's meant for humans,
and you can see when they have a bad time,
or a good time with it.
I hope they have a good time.
But usually they have a bad time when I run workshops.
And just to flag,
so I'm gonna summarize some techniques as I go through this
to, I think, really try to pull out a nice user guide.
All right.
So the first is collecting examples.
I think the key here is to get the worst examples.
It's W-R-S-T, which I would say is
you want examples that are whole,
real world, simple, and typical.
So you want a real, complete example
that you might see in the wild
that's not too bananas to hit people with,
that someone doing this type of thing might actually do.
So it's typical.
And I'm sure you've seen in docs,
one challenge is sometimes it has a lot of examples,
but they're little tiny pieces,
and the pieces don't add up.
So I think that ensuring it's whole and real world
makes sure that you're tackling real problems.
And simplicity is all about making sure
that a newcomer can actually digest it.
It's efficient for new learners.
So we settled on these three tables
as really reference points.
And I think Rich showed this off in the last talk.
So this is one he created on chemical compounds.
So this is, Rich has a PhD in chemistry,
so this is a table that's sort of real to him.
And this was useful to see some of the additional things
you could do with great tables.
And then this one we pulled off social media
from Grant Chalmers.
This is a carbon emissions table.
And one neat thing is it's sort of like a blend
between a table and a heat map.
So it introduces some really interesting concepts.
How can you create a heat map table
and do things like make sure the columns are the same width
and some other nice things.
And I will say we had really great inspiration.
So we were lucky to have the 2024 Posit Table Contest
to reference.
So Rich and another person named Curtis Kephart
have run a contest for the last few years
to get people's neatest, worstiest examples.
And this was really great inspiration to see
what's the range of things people might do
and sort of variation across real use cases.
All right, so that's collecting examples
and doing your worst.
Next, I would say scoping concepts.
So breaking them apart.
All right, so I showed this.
And the key here I just want to emphasize
is that mapping concepts is so important.
As Rich just produced example after example,
I feel like we had them in whiteboarding software online
and we were just marking them up like crazy.
When I show you this idea of structure, format and style,
this idea has caught on a bit.
We've seen people use it when they're teaching workshops
and it's really been helpful for structuring our docs.
But I can't emphasize enough that when we started this task,
we didn't know these were the concepts we'd use.
We actually had to do tons of diagramming and examples
to understand that we might actually use these concepts.
The other thing is Rich produced
this really great domain model.
So he dove into this idea of table structure
and he produced a diagram of all the different parts
that you might customize in a table,
all the different individual pieces of table structure.
And I think this is a really neat way
to emphasize core pieces of strategy
and sort of bubble up like a cheat sheet
that people can reference and use to understand your tools.
All right.
And all this adds up to for breaking the curse
is filling in these missing pieces.
So for us, structure, format, and style
are really nice things we can kind of like hang our hats on.
They're just a good size for explaining things.
You can pull up any example and ask
what are the structure, format, and style pieces.
And we even organize our code using these concepts.
All right.
So that's the idea of getting the examples
and breaking them apart into concepts.
I would say once you're at this stage,
you're in a good place to sequence in onboarding.
And I won't go into detail into onboardings.
And I will also note that actually immediately after this,
I have a PR to open on Great Tables Docs
because I've cheated.
As it turns out, library maintainers are not great
with their docs all the time and that includes this guy.
So I need to really flesh out the Great Tables onboarding.
I feel like this talk was the inspiration I needed.
But I will emphasize onboarding's been really discussed
a lot and there are a lot of really nice examples
you can find of it out there.
So I'd say R for Data Science, the book R Packages,
and Plot 9, another guide I've worked on,
all have really thorough onboardings
that you can use and reference.
I'm not gonna go into detail
because I think this topic is basically its own whole talk.
But in general, a lot of these really great user guides
I've seen have emphasized this concept of the whole game.
So teach the whole kind of end-to-end picture
so people have the big pieces
and the kind of like sense for the big game
before you go into the individual bits.
All right, so I'm gonna kind of skip sequencing
for the sake of time.
But I would say the emphasis there
is to ensure you do the whole game.
So you take your favorite worstiest example
and basically turn it into an onboarding.
All right, so the last things
are detailing the remaining concepts
and drafting a workshop.
And I think detailing remaining concepts
is one of my favorite topics
because I think most people
can get to onboarding pretty quickly.
But I feel like there's this kind of like
now what sense sometimes
after you give people like their first onboarding piece.
And I think what's neat,
one neat approach technique I've used
is this idea of a concept matrix.
But there are sort of like hidden concepts
in your documentation.
So what I do sometimes is I put the function names on rows
and then I'll put different parameters
things could take on columns.
And this is just to emphasize shared structure
across the package.
So an API reference usually goes horizontal.
It'll take one function and describe it in detail.
But what I like about the concept matrix
is that I think it flags pieces in the guide
where there should be guide pages.
So I would say guide pages should be vertical.
They should do slices that emphasize structure
shared across functions
or pieces that you might not see in the docs.
Uh-oh.
Whoa, see ya.
Oh, we're back.
Okay.
That was my, Max gave me a five minute warning.
So maybe that was his big way.
All right, so the concept matrix helps you
by exposing these sort of like vertical slices.
And the example I'd say here
is we have a page on column selection.
We noticed functions across categories,
structure, format, style.
A lot of them can select columns of a table to work on.
And this actually involves a little bit of,
there's quite a few options you can do
for selecting columns.
So it was nice to put it in its own page
where it could just flag to users, this is an activity.
And then we could even flag
some of these functions to show them
these are different types of places
you might end up doing it.
Another interesting one is this formatting pattern
that there's these parameters USEPs and locale.
And locale, I've actually never said that word out loud.
But I've thought it a lot.
So locale is shared by most of the format functions.
And another interesting thing is it interacts sometimes
with different parameters.
So to show you how locale might work,
if you have say like the English number,
well, this is just a number.
But 1,234, you know, in English,
you might separate the one into a comma, it's a unit.
In German, you might use a period.
But then you might use a comma where the English period was.
And if you use NOCEPS, you might not have a comma at all.
So essentially locale determines
how these numbers get formatted,
and it interacts with other things.
So in this case, sometimes it's really useful
to flag these dynamics.
A user clicking through your reference
is just gonna hit this definition over and over.
So our docs would just tell you what a locale is
over and over and over.
But we can have one page that actually surfaces
this dynamic across a bunch of different things
and shows you where it comes up.
All right, so I'm gonna go quickly
on the very last workshop piece.
This is all to say, for the user guide,
we usually break it down by topic.
I'm gonna scooch so fast.
For the workshop, we go by case study.
And the case studies usually are able to link to the guide.
But this has been really helpful for us
because people can graze the user guide.
But then the case studies we use to kind of say,
what's the slice across topics you need
to do the next most interesting thing?
All right, so that's the whole idea of the five steps.
Thanks you so much for watching.
If you find any cursed docs, please send them to me.
I'm an avid collector.
And thanks so much for watching.
Okay, thank you.
We have time for one question.
So how much documentation is too much documentation?
I don't know.
I don't even think I should document an answer to that.
But I don't think you can have too much.
But I do think the odds of it becoming cursed grows
the more documentation you have.
Okay, actually I have time for one more
if you're good with that.
Do GT and Pointblank use the Cordodox package?
If yes, will it replace Packagedown for R in the future?
Yeah, that's a good question.
I'm the maintainer of this package called Cordodox
to create an API reference in Python.
So GreatTables and Pointblank do use it.
But Packagedown's all R packages.
So I don't think it's gonna replace
Packagedown anytime soon.
As a Python developer, I don't have,
I love R, I actually absolutely love R and use it.
But I don't have room in my heart
to think about stepping on Hadley's territory.
I feel like he's pretty set, you know?
Yeah.
Okay, great.
Thank you and let's thank all of the speakers
for today's session.
All right.
Thank you.